TRANSCRIPT: Karl Annual Review (vollständig)
==================================================

I don't think you can see it. Could be, yes. So. My tickets. 2022... 2025. Good. Tell me, how did you like it? 2025. A short recap on your side. It was crazy. A lot. But I wanted it too. I wanted to take more responsibility. With Eva's team. Consolidate. It wasn't the easiest. But I think I held up. And met the challenge. Then came the whole Laura thing. That was last year. That was also ugly. A lot with HR and stuff. But I learned a lot from it. And Jennifer was also such a problem. I'm glad that it was solved. And of course with Axel. It was difficult to balance with the team. But when I look back at 2025. I learned a lot. It was a fast track for my leadership development. Even better than my course. Probably, yes. From that point of view. It was very good for me. You gave me the chance. To take more responsibility. I felt the responsibility. Just go full throttle. Don't give up. And keep going. That was nice. A lot of changes. But it was good. Are there things that you are proud of? That were achieved last year. That you achieved. Yes, I would say. How I did it with Axel. I'm proud that I... I was able to lead the team. More headcounts. That was definitely something. That made me proud. That I took more responsibility. And that I didn't crash. I didn't crash through that. I managed to maintain composure. And that I didn't crash. And that I didn't crash. Maintain composure. Maintain leadership and stability. That was nice. I'm proud of that. Are there things where you think you could have done more? With the team. Development. For each person. Axel pulled me out. Pulled you back. That's the biggest thing. I feel like I let down my team in that sense. That I didn't give them enough attention that they deserved. Due to just being involved with Axel. That's very interesting. There are definitely one or two feedbacks. They don't say it as radically as you see it. But there are a few things where you can see that you couldn't manage everything at the same time. Little things like that. Okay. I tried to summarize the feedback in two categories. One is the strengths. Recurring patterns. You will find yourself. And of course there are a few possible areas for improvement. But it was difficult. Because this year you were torn apart. And you probably invested a lot of energy and time in Axel. But you still managed to make it out of this team of two into one. And you noticed, or I noticed, that it started to change when there were a few first frictions with the girls. Everything was just a change. But it was just actively managed by you. That's why I think it was an absolutely strong performance. Although all this Axel drama. You managed to bring together this team, which is very feminine. And this team actually performs very well if you look at the pure data. What the bed always finds difficult to look at. But she understands it by now. That although more headcount was saved, more was worked away. I also said that to Alex and Jan recently. What kind of performance is actually achieved there, 30% less headcount for three years, but 30% more revenue. That is definitely recognition value, which I definitely give you for it. Because you actively managed it. And we've seen it before at dinner. A whole mix of different factors, which leads to the fact that the team has become more robust. And more resilient, but also more coordinated. Less complaining, I think. There are always moments when Roberto has something to complain about. But that's okay. It's not surprising with his cultural background. But overall it's amazingly quiet, which is good. And I think people understand what they have from you. That also comes from the feedback. So we look at the strengths. I have a few examples with me. We also look at the areas for improvement. I have a few examples with me. And then of course we'll talk about the money at the end. Okay, you've already said a little bit. Right, so the first strength is clear. Outstanding people leadership. That's what you want. And that's also what you're good at. And I wrote here, you built a stable and healthy team under difficult conditions. You were very distracted with AXA. And you got a different team, which was led differently, a different mindset. I don't think it was that far away from each other. But still, it was different. Different types of leadership. And then I have a few quotes that underline that. For example, I wrote, he genuinely enjoys people leadership and actively seeks these challenges. That with, for example, recently, I've never heard anyone say that. I would never have said it myself. You said so. The whole thing, what case was that? It wasn't long ago he meant, finally I got some decent people problem to solve. You're kidding, man. But that was in a nutshell. I think that was, what was that? That was already after Laura. That wasn't so nice. And that was also part of it. What was that? Yes, exactly, that was it. I was looking forward to that. You were looking forward to that. You had to have a critical conversation with her. That stuck with me so much. That resonated with me. That was genuine. Yes, yes, I liked that. And others say, here Jenny, for example, writes, he creates a safe space to speak openly and genuinely cares about team members. That's what everyone writes. I think that's, or a strength of his is this trusting. That's another point I have down there. Sean says, at this point I also like, he consistently has feedback meetings with everyone. It was worth mentioning him. And that is of course also worth mentioning, because there are more than four or five. And you also had at the beginning of the year, I think it was pretty much now, around Easter, where all this shit with the Laura boy really boiled up, where we had the meeting with you here. That was also part of it. Plus, of course, Jennifer,
People leadership, absolute strength. And I would like to know how you would classify yourself in the company. You would probably be in the top three overall, I would say. Then of course I also see a strong strength is your topic ownership. So AXA has clearly shown that you are through the pain yourself, you knew it was necessary, you agreed to it and you also took the pain yourself. Together with Sondrin you of course got a few people to help you and then at some point you realized, okay, you have to give more. And then Alina offered herself very well and luckily it works quite well. So I think the topic ownership is strongly characterized by you in a positive sense and also reliability. That's one thing that connects, especially under pressure. I think you also showed last year that you are just very, very strong. And that is also confirmed by people like Sondrin, for example. She writes at one point, I opened it because I wanted to read it to her. Because she is a very critical person. Yes, but she is already a bit positive. Well, yes, yes. So Sondrin writes under the point takes ownership. From my perspective, working with you, I see that you are building solid foundations on JAXA account, gaining a bit more autonomy through clearer timelines, action plans, could really strengthen your impact and make collaboration smoother. But overall, she says it's good. Yes, I would say that too. You have to earn the feedback from Sondrin. She doesn't just do that. She is also not afraid of the opposite, if it is applied. So she is definitely a fan of you. In the other area, she even gives you a 3 with very reliable on the actions you are taking. What I also find nice as a quote is from Alina. She also took the time to write these things. And she gave you a 3 on the ownership topic, for example. And writes. So it fit well. Yes, that's great that she expresses that. Alina wrote a lot of long feedbacks. I thought that was great. I will also say that it is really important that she thinks it's cool that she does that. You didn't expect that. No. And she shouldn't have written that. You probably don't see this feedback. And people have used it to get rid of it. Not in your case. You have my strongest feedback scoring as a person. But I thought that was nice. And she gave you a 3 instead of a 2. Yes. Yes. Especially because of the difficult situation when Joe was gone. I think Alina appreciates it when someone is clear. And then also helps. I think Joanna helps, but she is not clear. And I think that triggers Alina positively. That she gets some guidance. Joanna does it differently. Joanna also told me that she is friends with Alina. What makes it difficult. I said yes, I know her. I had to think of both of us. We also have ways how we separate one from the other. They have to be able to do that. Okay. Ownership and so on are confirmed not only by me, but also by others. A nice thing. Yes. Then we have trust, stability and culture. My feedback is, I think I say that every year, I like the word. Karl radiates integrity and trust across the organization. You are a stabilizing factor for the team. I think they like to come to you with their topics. They feel picked up. Even with people with whom you have less contact, like Alina. She noticed that relatively quickly. That gives the team a level of health. Of course, I'm not that close to it anymore. But I think in all these years, the team is in a good condition, like maybe never before. To the best essence, right? Yes. I know I'm doing my role as a leader correctly. If I get you to be better going out of the company than you did coming in. If I manage to do that, as a leader, that's a thing. Secondly, I see the biggest differentiation between leadership and manager. I'm not here to be your manager. I'm here to develop and create a team of people who can critically think by themselves. And if I've achieved that, then I did a good job as a manager. I think this philosophical approach is what really helps. To give people that space. It can also go in a bad direction. But I think as long as you do that. And now I have this team that is experienced, can critically think by themselves, are empowered to take their own decisions. That's maybe what gives this feeling that this team is so strong right now. I really put a lot of value on them being able to critically think by themselves. It's something I actually took out of university, with philosophy and political science. I knew fully well back then I'm not going to get a job with this degree. But this liberal arts thing was more or less teaching me how to critically think. How to be able to analyze stuff. And I think if you have this critical thinking skill, you can bring it into whatever you do. Whether it be working in retail or a tech company or something. It's always important. I don't want to go too far. But that's what I think why the team is so strong as it is now. Because I try to instill this importance of critical thinking into them. Yeah. Okay. Cool. Those are some of the strengths. I put them into three things. One is Outstanding People Management. The second is Ownership and Reliability Under Pressure. Which summarizes the AXA topic a bit. That was a big factor last year. And the third is Trust, Stability and Positive Culture. That you managed to do that so well last year. It wasn't an easy year. Because this whole Laura thing got into the team as well. And it was really annoying. And the expectation of you was, who's going to get rid of the old one? You couldn't do anything for a long time. I was thinking, I'm going to cross my fingers. But I think most people understood that things are already being regulated by you. You're also not able to conjure. You have to stick to rules and processes. And I think that leads to this increased trust and safety topic. That they know, there's something wrong. He's already taking care of it. It may take longer than we all want, but ... That was a good opportunity for me to show that. Because I know the feedbacks the year before were like, Karl is too nice.
I can only hope that Laura and Jennifer killed it a bit, that they see that I am not, but if I have to shift gears, then I can do that too. I don't want to bring down the entire team, but I will target it. I hope they see that and I think they do. Exactly. Now let's look at the possible development areas. I gave you one point. Deadlines. Create structures, routines or expectations that help the team grow. That's what I told you and I did that for everyone who did that. You didn't just get that from me. That was a bit of the problem I had last year, that I often saw things in the data that I then reported to you, where it should have been the other way around. You are all too little focused on workload balance and so on. That doesn't affect your team that much, but there are differences everywhere. It has to be clear, it has to be structured so that you can make decisions quickly. I also wrote about the performance management of the people, which you can measure well, that it is a bit too implicit. It is difficult because we are mainly in a remote setup. That's why it's good that the people were highlighted. That was an outcome of my findings. Who they are and how they work, except that we can read the tickets. You addressed that now. That's good. Fortunately, there are many positive findings. I also wrote that after this discussion you have already started to improve it. Interestingly, the topic of structure and routines, there are a few from your team that also address that. I had an example here. Some people miss clearer agendas, follow-ups from the meetings you have held. That's not a big deal. They know you have a lot of things to do, but they would like to see a little more structure in these things. As far as follow-through is concerned, that's the most difficult thing. You have to keep up with everything at the same time, but they actually want that. That was said by Mamibia. Sascha also said that. I think that's a point that you can easily get under control. You can see that these complaints are actually so small, because the rest is cool. They will find such things now. If you had bigger construction sites, these would be a positive signal. These are organizational things that you can do better if you have the time for it. You will probably have much more time for that now, because the topic of structure takes up much less space. You are still involved, but not four times a week. I don't know, you are even doing the BRM now. No, I'm doing this BRM on Friday, and then phase three starts, and then phase three. But there is only one meeting every two weeks. Yes, then you can of course ... But I see the point. In team meetings that I have every Thursday, I don't write anything in the agenda. That was my way, but I see the point and I can easily change that. Yes, I also think that this is a point that is relatively easy to fix. I'll take a look in there. Yes, there were actually a few. Maybe they were right at all, but ... Jenny Wetsch wrote, for example, Clear accountability for performance across all team members would help maintain fairness of the workload distribution. She wrote two of them. Yes, this is the point where I also saw that you could go deeper and also instruct people more clearly. We have to think about that together. I'm actually a fan of making this data visible for the team, so they know where they stand. Static should be possible. Yes, yes. Yesterday I brought the dashboard for CS to Zoho. It has not yet been released, but in theory everyone could see it. It's no longer a static HTML like I had a few weeks ago, but we have it in Zoho now. I just have to make sure that the data is regularly called cleanly. Then you can use it. Okay, then we still have ... Yes, okay, that's part of it. In development 2 there is now this follow-up organization. Pattern of topics being discussed, but not consistently followed through. That's what I said with the beta. It's actually one thing. Clearer guidance on non-structured leadership would help. Breitenbach writes, for example. What exactly is missing? Difficult to read out now, but you can of course also look ahead in the next one-on-one and say, give me my expectations. Exactly. I also wrote to ... You always do and have always been really strong when you are asked to do things. But what is still not 100% developed is the proactive. But in the last year that was also not to be expected. I take it again, but I could not give it as a clear expectation, because you were just busy with AXA. But that's more proactive like this audit report. Yes, exactly. Also the beta, for example, said, encouraging a bit more proactive and preventative approach would help. I do not know exactly what she means by that. Wait a minute, that's so crazy now. Process alignment, I think. But she does not understand that we do two projects every day. We do not have time to look in the morning what happened in the evening. People have a lot of projects. I see her point of view that I push the PSS team more about this preventative, proactive. But it is very difficult right now with the number of PSS teams I have and the number of German projects that are running. Yes, I understand. But I know what she means. Then I also wrote the senior situation. We talked about that briefly before. I would like the seniors to get a little bit of your pain in various situations. But maybe we can do it together with People & Culture, that we really define it again in the beta and in the Joe. What do we actually want? That a senior should only wear the title because he has been here for a long time and maybe he is experienced. That is not 100% clear to me either. We have to do a workshop or something. Because it is clear that you need the senior PSS as this person who does the difficult projects and also many of them. Do we really have to expect 17 internal projects in this special role? I don't think so, to be honest. But in moments of crisis, as Betsy always saves, let the seniors heal it. In surveillance of you, of course. But they should actually be able to get the hot iron out of the fire. They should be your wingman, like you are mine. And I don't know yet, I don't think they are there yet. How do you assess that? There was a situation last year. I have now forgotten a bit what happened. I have a question.
I wanted to escalate and not talk about the law, but listen to someone. Then I gave it to Jenny. I forgot who she was, but a senior. I said, call her and explain it to her. They did that. I definitely like to do that. To protect myself more when something like that happens. But not much happens, right? Exactly. That's just what I see. That's not a real development point. But I think people in culture are also interested in having a similar behavior to seniors. But if you are in a super technical role like the developer and the senior, you also have more complex problems to solve. You don't have to do internal projects. Some people want that. I think it's cool when Jenny has side topics. When the time is allowed. She said she loves confluence. She loves documentation. That's one thing I hate. Documenting stuff. She said she would never give up on that. Confluence Ambassador is really fun. It's a shame, because she is the victim of her part-time role. Exactly. Where she has to deal with the phone and the project. You have to give her the chance, but it can't take up too much space. She has to have customers first at that point. It's not that easy. Before you hear all the peer feedback, or do you have something else? There was nothing else. I'm too nice. That was always the problem every year. Lack of assertiveness? Yes. I didn't see anything here. I always worked on it. That was always my internal struggle. Being empathetic, but assertive at the same time. This balance. If that is finally left alone, then... Can I have a look? Peter told me last week, that I'm very human at the same time, but also military. There are no explicit statements this year. However, you can deduce, that if some say they want more clear guidance, more clarity and structure, then we would like to have more strength, more presence, more leadership. But no one says, that there will be too nice this year. Only indirect signals. Or what I see here. Karl demonstrates high level of empathy, prioritize, team harmony. But that doesn't go in the direction of too nice. It's something that is important to you, and what is important. No, everything is fine. I told you, that you have the definitive proof. That's what I wrote in the feedback. Because that was a topic, and I noticed how you worked on it. That's why you fulfilled this expectation, from my point of view. From what I saw. Sometimes you tend to fall from one extreme to the other. But I think, you balanced that well. Those were the few points, that you can work on. But in the last year, there were also little things. Because I think, you are a very mature leader. 100%. Did I have anything else to say? What we do, after we are done. The meeting is the recap. In the next one-on-one, we will see, what exactly you can do. The work on you and your team. Then you can pour it into fresh expectations. So you know, what I expect from you. But we don't do that today. I wanted to do it separately. In the end, a strong year. Strongly performed, in every aspect. Still a key part of the organization. I also wrote, that the next step, is not more effort, but a better system, for yourself. If you want, we can look at the money. I gave you a bonus of 110%. Thank you. It was reserved. I can also add something to your salary. I see. I can give you a total of 6% raise. What? I also distributed to you, once on the yearly fix, 3,500 and again 1,200 as a bonus. Wow. Good. What do I do now? Now you are annually, at Total Comp, at 78.2. Your base salary is, from April, 5,750. Thank you. Really? Yes, you can use it. Yes. Also earned. Of course. I would have liked to do more, but you know how difficult it is. Yes, I know. 6% increase. How much on the salary? On the salary? The salary is, I can tell you now, 3,500 per year, on the fix, and 1,200 on the bonus. 3,500 on the fix, and 1,200 on the bonus. 78,000, super. Yes. Thank you. Very much appreciated. Cool, I'm happy. Yes, okay. Yes, as I said, you are definitely at home, you are looking for people leadership, you are looking for these challenges, you want to have them, and a lot of them. It can be ugly, but you have now created even more skills on it. I think what is simply missing is a little more structure. People are asking for it now. It's a nice next step. Yes. Thank you. Thanks.
